hello everyone I'm pleased to announce
my new tour for 2024 beginning in early
February and running through June Tammy
and I an assortment of special guests
are going to visit 51 cities in the US
you can find out more information about
this on my website
jordanbpeterson.com as well as accessing
all relevant ticketing information I'm
going to use the tour to walk through
some of the ideas I've been working on
my forthcoming book out November 2024 we
who wrestle with God I'm looking forward
to this I'm thrilled to be able to do it
again and I'll be pleased to see all of
you again soon
bye-bye I'm not interested as I know you
are not in a world where well-being is
perfectly evenly distributed even if it
were possible a world in which
everything is evenly distributed is a
world that is punishing people who
contribute more and rewarding people who
contribute
less
[Music]
hello everybody I had the great pleasure
today of speaking with Brett Weinstein
who I've talked to a fair bit and who
has mediated some of the debates I had
with Sam Harris and uh you know our
conversations have been very productive
across the last it's getting to be seven
or eight years we started today by
talking about the Darian Gap and the
problem of immigration and we moved from
that to the solution to that problem um
after analyzing not least the fact that
immigration conducted in this manner is
very hard on the people who are
immigrating you know traversing the
jungle as they have to being robbed and
raped in consequence it's a very
halfhazard way of going about whatever
the hell is going on we talked about
that then in broader terms with regards
to the relationship between the fact of
that uncontrolled and unrestrained
immigration um like that's a
pathologization of something that's
necessary and something that's also
producing a somewhat of a constitutional
crisis at the moment we talked about
that in relationship to broader
conceptions of multiculturalism per se
and talked about the advantages and
disadvantages to that diversification of
society and we went from there deeper I
would say into a discussion of what it
is that might necessarily be key to
unifying a society even in the face of a
diverse plurality so that it becomes
maximally productive generous and
sustainable across time and that led us
into a discussion of as Brett put it the
sacred and the shamanic as two
manifestations of that which is deepest
so join us for the ride hello sir it's
been a while since we talked um how are
you doing I'm doing all right it's great
to see you Jordan as always sorry to
hear about your troubles up in Canada oh
yeah people bring that up and uh it kind
of surprises me because I forget about
it fairly quickly it's so absurd and
Preposterous that it's hard to take it
with any degree of seriousness I I think
it's partly because it's more serious
for other people in some ways than it is
for me I mean there's not much they can
do to me they can damage my reputation a
little bit oh I don't know I think
they're probably fueling your reputation
um but you know it's a badge of honor
that they would go after you this way it
uh it's definitely Flack over the target
yeah well at some point to it becomes
necessary to stop your association with
people who have deviated from the
appropriate course to dramatically so
and I have to figure out how to
negotiate that tell me Brett what are
you up to like what does your life look
like right now what are you working on
what what sort of problems are you and
your wife start trying to solve
intellect
practically where are you in your
life uh that's a good question at the
moment my uh mind is racing having just
come back from Panama and looking at the
migration coming through the Darian Gap
that was a shocking experience even
though I was pretty well-versed in the
details of what was going on seeing it
has changed a lot of things in my
thinking so that's one thing I'm also
quite focused on the fact that the covid
disaster whatever its actual nature was
is something that we've reached a lot of
clarity at Great cost but because we are
not having a a final discussion about
what took place the the folks who made
this happen the folks who orchestrated
it seemed to be building the structures
that would have allowed them to defeat
the dissidents and most people are not p
pay attention to those changes and I
have the sense that we're being set up
for a rematch and it will not go well if
we don't uh derail their
efforts okay so you're you've been Con
well okay so let's put those together a
little bit you you were down in Panama
with Michael ywn if I remember correctly
I do know this I was thinking about
coming along although that became
impossible at the present time for a
variety of reasons not least because I'm
trying to finish up my most recent book
but you were down there and you took a
look so tell me about going down there
tell me what the advantages were of
actually being there and maybe also the
potential disadvantages I
mean looking at it from a distance
obviously has its costs but looking at
it close makes it extraordinarily
personal and so I'm curious about how
you've how you what you've concluded how
you've recalibrated your views what you
think is going on there what you saw and
then we'll talk more perhaps about well
let's start with what's going on my
understanding is that essentially the
migration levels into the us from the
South have doubled per year from their
alltime high so there were something
like 1.3 million people coming across
the border in various forms say 20 years
ago and that was kind of a peak and then
it declined quite precipitously for a
number of years and now it's doubled
from that at least doubled from that
Peak so is that your understanding and
and what did you see well that's exactly
the kind of thing that is impossible to
assess based on Direct observation
obviously you want data over a long
period of time at every uh place where
people are are crossing and I I couldn't
get that the the truth is I was
unsure why I was going I felt very
strongly that I needed to see it but I
couldn't explain to myself what that was
going to change because I had seen so
much of the documentation before and
what I discovered was that my intuition
that I should see it in person was quite
right that what changed was not so much
looking through one's own eyes versus
looking through a camera lens but the
understanding of physically how things
are distributed in space is not
something you can even pick up from the
map you have to you have to Traverse
some of these distances in order to see
uh what's taking place and to give you
an example of what that
changes the there there's obviously a
terminology problem we have lots of
people talking in terms of an invasion
of the us and we have other people
talking about a
migration and what I came to understand
in looking at this is that it's actually
both things and not the same there's
clearly a huge wave of people they are
fleeing poverty and the collapse of
their
societies they are migrating
North for economic reasons and this
becomes quite apparent when you talk to
people in uh the camps there these
Transit camps where people who have just
walked out of the Jungle in the Darian
Gap are spending time recovering
and uh in large measure accumulating
enough money to buy a bus ticket almost
everybody gets robbed walking through
the Darian Gap and so they arrive with
nothing um and anyway they spend time in
these camps and you can walk around and
speak with them often there are language
barriers but the interesting thing is
everybody seems eager to talk and they
all say the same thing when you ask them
why it's always about money and
um you know I I don't mean to trivialize
it obviously many of our ancestors
migrated because of the poverty uh of
their their home countries and the
comparative opportunity they found in
the new world but what it isn't is
people seeking political Asylum that's
the excuse that's used at our Southern
Border in the US but it's absolutely not
true not a single person said anything
remotely like the idea that they were
were
being being oppressed or Target they
were not being persecuted so on the one
hand there is this large migration of
people understandably looking for
opportunity
and the problem is that the rules of our
system say that that's not a
justification for entering the country
because to the extent that people are
entering the country for economic
reasons they do so at the cost to
Americans who are already here and it's
obviously the obl ation of our
government to protect the interests of
the citizens and this is a failure in
that regard but what becomes apparent
when you look at this migration it has a
certain character to it it's
recognizable and not so different from
the waves of migration that we used to
see come up from Central
America but there is this other movement
of large numbers of
people they are Chinese they are housed
separately this is the thing that's
really hard to understand is that they
effectively mix into this massive
migration of economic
refugees having traveled a different
route most of the Chinese migrants are
actually skipping the tribulations of
the derian Gap by boat and they are
housed in different places and when one
attempts to go talk to them there are
two obstacles to getting any information
one is that the Border uh the Border
authorities the ca front forbids access
to the camp where the Chinese migrants
are housed now some of the members of
senafront are clearly not happy about
the job that they have been told to do
but nonetheless that organization Brett
what's that
organization senafront it is effectively
the Panamanian border Authority okay the
Panamanian border Authority and do you
want tell people exactly what the Darian
Gap is sure um the Darian Gap is a 60m
gap in the Pan-American Highway the
panamic highway runs 177,000 miles from
prudo Bay Alaska to the southern tip of
South America and there's only one place
where you can't Traverse it by Road and
that's in the Darian province of Panama
where Panama meets Colombia and what
exist there is um a formidable jungle it
is
uh an extremely treacherous place even
just at the physical level of Crossing
it it's something that requires a great
deal of skill um to get across it and
most of the migrants do not have the
requisite skills they certainly don't
have the equipment and there's a human
tragedy unfolding in the Darian Gap as a
result of the fact that these people are
being encouraged to to come across but
that piece of road has never been
completed in part because the jungle is
difficult but in large measure because
that part of Panama is effectively
ungoverned um it's a no man's land um in
addition to being a an ecological
treasure um unique on Earth and uh even
more special because so much of the more
accessible jungle in the neotropics has
been devastated by various processes uh
mining uh illegal uh Lumber extraction
Etc well you you were talking about the
Chinese migration which you know sounds
to me like a complete bloody mystery so
like what SCA on what scale is this
occurring why are the Chinese housed
differently who are they why are you
forbidden you said there were obstacles
to talking to them one was the
Panamanian border authorities you had
you had made made illusion to another
obstacle so let's continue with the
discussion of the Chinese so the other
obstacle is the Chinese themselves who
are absolutely not forthcoming in a way
that is utterly
conspicuous now I've been to many places
on Earth some of them dangerous I've
encountered people who were reluctant to
talk because they feared some Authority
would get wind of what they had said and
that they would be punished this did not
feel like that at all these were people
who were not interested in conveying
information about why they were
migrating
and in fact their tone to the extent
that one interacted with them at all was
mocking of us for our interest in fact
there was one incident where Michael Yan
who has spent time in China uh and all
over the
world was uh trying to strike a strike
up a conversation and this one uh
gentleman uh pretended to be Korean and
not Chinese and um Michael caught him um
he induced him to say something in
Chinese and there was laughter uh
amongst all of the folks sitting there
they thought this was quite funny but
nonetheless um the the Chinese migration
is not entirely men but it is heavily
biased in favor of men they appear to be
young and fit um military age for the
most part the Chinese Camp I realized
only after I had left that I did not not
see children there that's very different
than the other migrants many of whom
have children um and and they were
everywhere in in the other camps so
there's something very special about
whatever is going on with the Chinese
migrants and it is very odd that the
very same border Authority that would
not allow us uh into the the Chinese
Camp a place called San
vente um were perfectly happy to have us
walk around the other camp we were free
to walk around and take photographs it
was night and day different how they
treated the two groups and for no
obvious reason is there any sense do you
do you have any sense of comparative
numbers say of the economic migrants
versus The Mysterious Chinese
migrants and any sense of why this
difference exists and and what does
Michael yon think about that difference
just out of
curiosity that is a great question
Michael is obviously quite concerned
about the meaning of the Chinese
migration is a separate matter and you
know I must say just for the benefit of
uh Clarity to your audience um my view
is that is one of compassion for the
Chinese people who I view as living
under an oppressive regime and to the
extent that that oppressive regime is is
an enemy of my country I view people who
are being uh oppressed by it
sympathetically but I did not have the
sense that I was looking at people
fleeing that regime I had the sense that
I was looking at people who were
um migrating at the encouragement of
that regime now I can't say that that's
definitely true but that was definitely
the flavor of it um as we were
attempting to understand what we were
saying I don't know what the comparative
numbers are I know that we're talking
about um thousands of people a
day sometimes 10,000 that's a number
that I heard described by people in a
position to know I also know it's very
clear on the ground that the expectation
is for those numbers to rise
considerably that there are elaborations
of these camps being constructed even
what do considerably mean do you suppose
because that's about we we bandied
around the figure of about three three
and a half million earlier in the
program and my understanding at the
moment is that that's the case I've
looked into the data to some degree and
tried update myself and to also view
this in some historical perspective so
what do you think substantive increase
means and do you don't have any real
idea what percentage of those so-called
migrants are are the
Chinese that you
described I don't and I also find it
fascinating that um that the two
migrations appear to fuse in in in Daran
Panama there's no obvious reason for
that to the extent that the Chinese are
coming in um by boat it's almost to me
it Feels Like The
Familiar uh economic migration is
cloaking something else that there's
there's a deliberate choice to blend
these two things so that people trying
to discuss what's taking place will
mistake one for the other now I hope
that's just my imagination right away
with me but uh the distinction in the
demeanor of the migrants and the
behavior of those in charge of these
camps was unmistakable right well so
what you have there for hard data so to
speak is the fact of the difference in
the response of the authorities to the
presence of the two types of Camp right
because that begs an obvious question
it's like well if it's nothing but one
thing why are there two processes right
and I should also just for the sake of
completeness say that we did see some
Chinese folks in the the main camps now
I don't know what the meaning of that
exactly is we saw signs that were in
Chinese and and the the migrants in the
main camps were uh not for forthcoming
either uh so I I can't say what's taking
place but I can I can say that the one
of these migrations appears to be highly
organized and careful and the other one
is so disorganized uh as to be tragic
the number of people who are being
beckoned to cross the Daran Gap who are
being robbed that's virtually all of
them raped which is uh a large fraction
of the women Crossing through and dying
in the Gap because they were unprepared
or victims of
violence uh it's really it's an
unspeakable horror that anybody would be
encouraging people to join that
migration as your business grows the
workload can become overwhelming tasks
that used to take a day now take a week
if you're feeling this strain netsuite
is here to provide relief 37,000
businesses have upgraded to netsuite by
Oracle netsuite is the number one Cloud
Financial system streamlining accounting
financial management inventory HR and
much more for 25 years netsuite has been
helping businesses do more with less
close their and days not weeks and drive
down costs recognizing that every
business is unique netsuite offers a
tailored solution that aligns with your
specific key performance indicators all
in one efficient system with a single
source of Truth netw Suite will help you
manage risks get reliable forecasts and
improve margins with netsuite you have
everything you need to grow all in one
place right now download Net's popular
kpi checklist designed to give you
consistently excellent performance for
absolutely free at netsuite.com sjbp
that's netsuite.com
jbp to get your own key performance
indicator checklist again that's
netsuite.com
jbp okay okay so let's let's concentrate
on that for a sec I I want to LEAP up
the ladder a bit conceptually here um
so as you pointed
out the United States has being an
immigrant
country it isn't obvious what its
carrying capacity is that that's very
complicated problem it isn't obvious at
all how much immigration
is too little optimal or too
much um it's certainly the case that
it's a straightforward thing to be
sympathetic for people who are moving
merely because they want better opportun
economic opportunities for themselves
and their children I mean that's a very
compelling reason it's not something to
be made light of um it's interesting
that you observed there were very
there was almost no claim of um
necessity for political
Asylum
now what what you would hope possibly is
that we could have an intelligent
discussion about an optimized rate of
migration now you pointed out that an a
rapid influx of poverty-stricken people
into a stable Society potentially
produces a situation where those people
compete especially with the people who
are struggling hardest in the current
state for relative Economic Opportunity
and so that migration is typically not a
a detriment to people who are in
established positions of
hierarchical um Advantage but it they're
definitely or that it you can make the
strongest case that they are genuine
competitors for people at the lower end
of the socioeconomic distribution now we
seem to be experiencing something akin
to that in Canada we have the highest
migration rate in the world at the
moment if I if I have my figure figures
correct or at least in the Western World
which is where people generally want to
immigrate and one of the consequences of
that apparently is an an absolute
explosion in housing prices and
obviously that's going to hurt people
who are poorest the most okay but
there's there is some utility in
migration let's say and and it is also
the case that the US economy depends to
some degree on the availability of
lowcost Labor all right now what you
would hope in my estimation is that that
would be handled with some degree of
forethought and
intelligence and that wouldn't be the
kind of handling that would result in a
constitutional crisis in the US which
seems to be unfolding in a manner that's
absolutely jaw-dropping but even perhaps
more directly relevant to your story is
well if we're being driven by sympathy
with those who are struggling to be free
and to pursue Economic Opportunity in
the spirit of the Great American
Dream It's still immoral to have those
people enter the country first illegally
and
second second at Great risk to
themselves in this halfhazard manner and
third in a manner that's absolutely in
100% of clear benefit to cartel
criminals so so what the hell Brett like
and and this opens up an even wider
topic of discussion I
mean I would say from our discussions
previously that your political
views such as they are were likely to
the more liberal than mine have become I
never regarded myself as a particularly
conservative person
till well until whatever's happened in
the last 10 years happened and but but I
do believe that on some issues at least
you're on the more Progressive side than
me now you've been battered around in
all sorts of interesting ways over the
last decade and you've seen some very
strange things transpire and it's
clearly the case that your trip to the
Darian Gap was one of those experiences
and
so what do you make of the immigration
issue what do you make of how it's
handled and then what do you think
thinks going on and why and what has
this
done in the long sequence of things that
have exposed you to the kinds of
information that might require people at
least at some level to modify their
views all right I'll try to remember all
those questions I'll try to remember
them um the first thing to say is there
is some rate of immigration
that makes sense I don't really see this
as an issue of carrying capacity because
the number of migrants Might well that
that is desirable might well vary with
the the economic era but the problem
here is that a we never had the
discussion we are simultaneously
facilitating this migration the American
flag is visible on projects in this
migration in the Daran of Panama we're
facilitating it the International
Community is facilitating it through
theom the international organization of
migration an entity that appears to
believe that migration is simply in and
of itself a good thing people and that's
what what's the
organization the international
organization of migration for migration
um the the idea that these uh presumably
well intended people are inviting people
into the horror of the the Darian Gap
uh is mindblowing but nonetheless if we
were to decide that some level of
migration was desirable at this moment
in history you certainly wouldn't go
about it this way for one thing we are
in effect repeating the error that we've
seen in Europe where a huge wave of
migration arrived and nobody thought to
ask the question of the migrants if they
wanted to be
European and so a large number of people
entered Europe who appeared absolutely
hostile to the values of the West and my
feeling is if you're going to bring
people in then you bring people in who
want to be part of your Society it's the
obvious question and not asking it is
such a dangerous mistake to make I can't
believe we would repeat that error but
we are absolutely doing it now I did not
see the migration at the southern border
but many others have and they report
that nobody is being asked anything
people are effectively asked their
their identity their name and their
birth date and nobody checks now that is
certain even if the majority of people
arriving at our Southern border are
simply people looking for a better way
of life who are disproportionately
likely to be hardworking and uh to
behave themselves that is certainly
going to provide a mechanism for people
who are not going to behave and don't
want to be part of the us to uh arrive
unannounced there's no way that doesn't
turn into a disaster in the near term so
and a disaster of what form a disaster
of what form aart from now you you
pointed to one thing which is the the
the general problem of integration and
that brings up a whole wealth of
potential issues like are we are we
contemplating this through the lens of
something like the classic Melting Pot
are we making the assumptions that there
is a core set of Western values and even
more specifically n American values
that must and should be abided by by
people who come are we abandoning the
radical Multicultural project that
proclaims in the post-modern way that
there is no superordinate set of values
and so and then so that's more on the ma
on the side of just the the the issue of
integration per se and the in and the
issue of national Unity but then there's
the darker part of that too which is
it's one thing to want to maintain your
own culture it's another thing to be
actively hostile to the culture that you
are migrating to or in or invading right
I mean those are very different people
even I mean at at the worst the former
people are xenophobic at the worst the
latter people are armed enemies of your
Society right and it's relatively or or
Psychopathic adventurers who are out to
cause as much bloody Mayhem for their
own personal satisfaction in including
sadism as they can possibly manage and
if you don't think there are people like
that you're exactly the kind of idiot
they like to pray on so okay so you you
have concerns it sounds like you have
concerns on both those fronts and and
I'm I'm also curious
about I mean this is this is grounds for
the deepest part of this discussion
potentially what might constitute the
core values of the identity that people
who would want to come into theer to the
United States and be Americans like what
is that core identity because it's
certainly the case that it doesn't look
like Americans can come to any agreement
about that amongst themselves anymore
and you know I'm not saying that as
someone who isn't from a country where
exactly the same problems are making
themselves manifest
so okay so let's back up a little bit
you you you see two problems here
there's a problem of unregulated and
badly planned and economic migration and
then there's a parallel problem of just
exactly who is using that opportunity to
do whatever it is that they're doing two
separate categories of people seems like
at least a reasonable proposition or
something to be apprehensive about
subsidiary problem which is even if
migration is good and as I said
historically the allowance has been
about a million people a year in the
illegal route let's say um triple that
is is a lot we haven't had a chance to
discuss that it looks like it's
increasing and
uh that brings us brings forward the
problem of integration and so you
pointed to this an organization
international organization of of
migration is that is that the prop y
yeah you said it's it is apparent to you
and perhaps to them that unrestricted
migration and so that would be like
economic Mobility is that's what's
driving us is a philosophy of economic
mobility and that unrestricted migration
is just a good thing in and of itself
and and there are what a variety of
organizations who are pushing that
proposition forward and facilitating
this movement and are they like
advertising in the countries where these
people are coming from how how is this
actually how and why is this occurring
and how is it
organized all right so there's a bunch
there I want to come back to the
question of uh what are American values
what this has to do with political left
and right but I also want to address the
question you just asked and so there's a
structure to this migration which is not
apparent to an outsider most of the
migrants are arriving in keto
Ecuador it's not obvious why that should
be geographically it's not the right
place to start because Ecuador does not
border Panama it happens that Ecuador
has a policy of not requiring Visas so
when people come from the Middle East
and there are many migrants in this
migration coming from the Middle East
Odd as that
sounds um they arrive in keto Ecuador
they migrate through Colombia they enter
the Darian Gap and they cross over into
Panama at which point they their their
Journey North is facilitated by these
organizations uh very directly there are
large buses a huge Fleet of them that is
constantly circulating and migrants are
um as I've mentioned they're almost
always robbed as they cross the dairy
and it takes time for them to earn
enough money to buy a bus ticket and if
they don't earn enough money to buy a
bus ticket though this is not widely
publicized they are given a ticket in
order to speed them North and then the
strangest thing happens which is all of
the country
between uh Panama and the United States
uh passed them along now Heather and I
crossed through all of those borders
except the last one between Panama and
Costa Rica in 1991 every one of those
borders was tightly controlled nobody
crosses nobody gets waved
through um but now if you're going north
and you're in one of these buses all of
these countries seem to have agreed as
that as long as you keep going they're
not going to say anything about it
that's an that's an odd fact and it
suggests a kind of international
coercion in order to to to establish
this route and to keep it
open um so the information about how to
make the journey is being circulated
such that people know where to fly and
where to go from there um you know this
is a modern migration although uh I met
a young woman Jennifer who had just
crossed through the Darian Gap had a
horrifying story to tell uh she's
Venezuelan and she was a college student
and she was fleeing the collapse of
Venezuela uh she in fact said that she
was headed to Costa Rica where she
intended to stop she was going to settle
in Costa Rica but um in any case
um the the fact is she uh was she had
all of her money taken I'm I did not ask
her though we spoke in oblique terms I'm
quite convinced that she was uh raped um
while she was in in the Gap um and she
was waiting to accumulate the money to
get a um a bus sticket North I'm hoping
that she will contact me and tell me how
her her journey is is going but
nonetheless the uh yes International
organizations are creating the route and
distributing information about how to
move these people start with cell phones
that they're able to get uh upto-date
information the migration involves
strange uh Partners the Chinese camps
and vente apparently uh involves lots of
people having money wired to them from
family back in China uh via Western
Union um so anyway this is this is a
this is a different this is It's a
hybrid between the most low Tech
slogging through jungle and high tech uh
contact and exchange of funds and things
that allows people to these buses which
are then
spirited spirited north um but yes it's
it's an Open Secret I mean most
panamanians that I talked to people in
Panama City um were aware that there was
some migration uh but did not have very
good information about it so largely
this is just people passing through
these
societies um let's go back to the
question you asked about uh political
orientation and what the values are and
I've done a lot of thinking thinking
about this long before I went to to
Panama to see this and I've come to the
conclusion that we've been sold a bill
of goods and the bill of goods was
called
multiculturalism and the problem with
multiculturalism is that it sounds like
something that those of us who like to
interact with people from many different
cultures should
appreciate but it's in fact the opposite
of the thing that we the value that we
actually hold value that we actually
hold I would call Western
cosmopolitanism
cism it's the
opposite right multiculturalism is the
idea that people
should uh not join our societies but
they should maintain their own
Traditions uh in an isolated pocket and
and that we should effectively reject
the idea of becoming one people in the
west it's just a reduplication of the
situation that obtains in the World At
Large with no appreciation for the fact
that if you bring people together and
reduplicate the situation of the World
At Large with no uniting meta narrative
let's say you also bring in all of the
conflict like obviously because the the
delusion seems to be that now just
because they're and I I think it maybe
it's fueled by this this an underlying
materialism so maybe the notion is if
you bring diverse people from all over
the world regardless of their culture
and you provide them with sufficient
Economic Opportunity given that conflict
is driven fundamentally by
economic uh economic need let's say or
economic uh differences that that will
just vanish somehow magically now I'm
not saying anyone necessarily thought
this through but you know my sense is
this that the systems of ideas that are
motivating these Mass
occurrences they're they have their own
internal spirit and forward moving
impetus and and they can be full of
internal conflict and no one really
sorts that out but that's what it seems
seems to be it's got to be something
like well we bring everyone together
like they are where they already are but
now because they're rich it's going to
work out fine and there isn't there
isn't any unversal system of values that
needs to be proferred other than the
plenitude of Economic Opportunity and so
why do you think there's something to
that right because I would say you could
make a case although it's not obvious
that people who are in comparative
poverty are perhaps more likely to turn
to conflict although I don't think the
relationship is one to one what do you
think what do you think is wrong with
that theory of Peace bequeathed by
Economic Opportunity and and why well
let me put it in biological
terms there are two basic reasons for
any creature but especially humans to
collaborate the most primary reason is
genetic
relatedness the second reason is the
value that is created through
reciprocity and if you allow me to paint
with a broad
brush what we call the West I believe is
most fundamentally about the agreement
to put aside our lineages and
collaborate because there's wealth to be
produced and this notion which you know
it has its roots uh in in Antiquity but
I believe that this was accidentally
invented in its current form by the
American founding fathers that in in
essence in order to Confederate the
colonies they built a set of rules that
didn't put anybody at particular
Advantage now they did it imperfectly
there's obviously some glaring defects
in our founding documents and things but
in general they solved this tremendous
problem and over the course of the next
couple hundred years that system was so
unbelievably productive by putting the
people who were in a in the best
position to collaborate into contact and
facilitating their putting their racial
differences aside we became a Powerhouse
and so the American experiment became
contagious because once people saw how
Dynamic it was and what a high price
they had been paying for putting their
genetic relatedness first everybody
wanted to join it so that is to me the
west and although I am a patriotic
American I'm also I am a patriot of that
idea I think it is the thing that we
should rally around and what it means is
that we should take on this Cosmopolitan
notion that you can partner with anybody
it's really a question of whether they
have the right insight and values not a
question of what God they pray to and um
that is now under attack that is under
attack from people who would fetishize
our differences and make it impossible
for that kind of collaboration to happen
so I do see the West as back on its
heels and in need of a a vigorous
defense which is part of why I'm doing
what I'm doing I think the world is in
great danger if that idea is lost um
even for a brief period okay so let me
ask you about that and I do also want to
return to I guess we're probably
approaching It obliquely Anyways to the
transformation of your ideas about
political and economic structure but it
there's an of the argument that you just
formulated that that I can't easily
distinguish from the proposition that
mere material opportunity will bring
peace so let let me walk through your
argument and summarize it tell me if
I've got any of it wrong and and then
let's delve more deeply into that
possible
Paradox so the first thing you posited
is
that the default social organization for
human beings is kin Rel is is kin
relation right and the word kind itself
comes from kin and so we are by
Nature more likely to
extend our sense of self to those who
are genetically related to us and
there's great utility in that not least
on the reproductive front if you think
about it across time but also it enables
us to form the tight blood-based bonds
so to speak that are least likely to be
broken with the ravages of
time now there is a transformation in
Viewpoint which you Associated most
particularly with the founding of the
United States that's that transformed
that idea into something like a more
General appreciation for the
possibilities of radical altruistic
reciprocity
regardless of kin relation I wouldn't
say I wouldn't say altruistic the thing
that drives
alistic reciprocally altruistic means
that we are at Advantage by
collaborating we both come that's fine
that's fine I'm I'm that sorry that
that's perfectly perfectly reasonable re
uh
restatement so the notion is is that
there's tremendous comparative advantage
to be gained as a consequence of
collaboration independent of kinship and
that's partly because you can draw on a
more diverse range of talents and
abilities and developing that argument
might butus suggestions that a more
diverse Multicultural population would
be useful because of diversity of
opinion if you buy that sort of thing um
but but then and and then so I would I
would take issue with two of your
propositions one is that the core of
that is somehow
American and also although I think the
Americans elaborated that very well but
also that I don't see how to distinguish
that from the proposition that mere
economic success will guarantee
something approximating peace
independent of any other
overarching framework now it seems to me
so so give me one more minute to
elaborate on this and then I I'd like
love to let you
respond I think there are
preconditions that have to be met for
the idea that
non-kin reciprocally altruistic
relationships can be
established I think those are
metaphysical
presumptions I think they're encoded
generally in what we what strikes us as
religious language which is a reflection
of their depth and
necessity and those among those are as
far as I can tell are those presumptions
that are axiomatic to the
judeo-christian tradition I think those
are a precondition for the development
of that attitude of radical reciprocal
altruism to non-kin participants that
characterizes in its highest form the
United States but I I think it's
a even though that flowered madly with
the establishment of the US its roots
are much much deeper than that certainly
you have to give some credit to Great
Britain and then to the entire Western
tradition behind that and then it seems
to me to the Greek and judeo-christian
traditions from which that arose so why
stop with the US I know you don't in
some fundamental sense but also what do
you make of the need for extending that
notion of culture beyond the the merely
economic and pragmatic or the
self-evidently economic and pragmatic
all
right first of course uh reciprocity as
as the the engine of collaboration isn't
invented by the American Founders I mean
in fact every mutualism that exists in
nature is of exactly the sort so it's
not that they invented it what they did
was they invented a set of rules that
made it the basis for a society right so
they codified it more effectively in a
manner that could be implemented
politically and
economically yeah I in fact I would say
they codified it well enough for it to
be a functional
prototype but that
prototype that prototype
created an
unbelievable period of dynamism when you
think of the number of inventions that
are American in origin from the airplane
to the computer to
Plastics it it's mindboggling how many
things Americans accomplished in a short
period of time and my contention is if
we had a society in which you were
fundamentally predisposed to collaborate
with those who came from the same place
you did most of that wouldn't have
happened right that this happens only
when you're liberated to collaborate
with anyone because they're the right
partner so that idea has a tremendous
amount of power in it I also believe
that it becomes the nature of a
functional stable globe that does not
rip itself apart in Conflict now I take
your challenge how do we know that
simply Distributing um
the the spread of of economic well-being
won't cause peace to break out and the
reason in
China it doesn't really anywhere absent
this agreement what you want if in the
end you start realizing that you are
closely related to this set of people
people and at the moment you know
whatever group you have is in a position
to get the jump on some other group
who's less closely related to you then
that game the game of lineage versus
lineage competition and violence which
has characterized virtually all of
history until the last couple hundred
years that game is constant this is the
only alternative we have to it and the
hope is that it is the best I I I'm I'm
not interested as I know you are not in
a world where well-being is perfectly
evenly distributed I don't want it
perfectly evenly distributed because
it's impossible in any case but yes even
if it were possible a world in which
everything is evenly distributed is a
world that is punishing people who
contribute more and rewarding people who
contribute less MH what I it also
forestalls any possibility of trade
because if there are no differences
between you and then of economic
significance across the multiple
dimensions of potential economic
comparison there's no motivation
whatsoever for us to collaborate right
because we can't rise out of our radical
equality anyways plus everything we have
is exactly the same so it means it just
makes a mockery of the notion of well
progress and and trade and that means
that we're now unable to capitalize on
our differences so that is the
antithesis of this diversity that's
being put forward as a pan see this is
why communism is so closely associated
with scarcity is it demotivates exactly
the thing that makes a society function
so I don't want that but and if you if
we'll get back to the question of why I
still see myself as a liberal I do want
to see something as evenly distributed
as possible and that is
opportunity right the market works best
when somebody who has the potential to
contribute something wonderful is not
side line cleaning someone else's toilet
right so to the extent that everybody
has access to the market and that they
are rewarded when they bring something
to humanity that makes us better off you
get a system in which wealth is not
perfectly evenly distributed in fact
maybe you would expect a kind of Paro
principal distribution but that nobody
is frozen out right if you if you're
down in the the low quadrant according
to the Paro principle but you have the
ability
to find your way out by contributing
something good then your motivation to
do it is maximal and so so anyway that
to me is what a hard-headed liberal
would see as desirable so if I
understand you correctly you see the
limit case to multiculturalism as
something like the fundamental
antagonism between a kin-based ethical
system and a more abstracted system
system based on the notion of abstracted
reciprocal altruism it's something like
that so what you're basically saying is
that those two
orientations cannot exist coexist
peacefully they are in essence
antithetical to one another and so then
that begs the question the next question
then would be something like are there
cultures that are more tilted in their
ideological proclivities towards the kin
based alleges system and others that are
more tilted like the European countries
towards a more abstract formulation of
what
constitutes productive and generous
reciprocal altruism look you know here's
a thought
Brett so with these large language
models we now have the opportunity to
map out semantic space so let me give
you an example of this one of my
employees a former student has mapped
out the semantic network of the concept
of God now the way he did that was to
find the smallest possible set of words
that can be substituted in discourse for
the idea of
God it's a substitutability issue okay
so imagine this
that there are 10 words or concepts that
are most likely to exist in the same
cloud of conceptual space as the idea of
God you could dispense with that central
idea and just use that conation of 10
subsidiary ideas as a
replacement then you can imagine each of
those ideas has a cloud of associated
ideas around
it right and this is literally encoded
in semantic space it's a statistical
relationship now you could imagine that
there's a semantic
web around the conceptualizations of
kin-based ethical
systems and there's a and a center as
well my brother before anyone else that
might be the concept at the center
something like that right but that could
be mapped then you could imagine that
this other cloud of Concepts that is
associated with abstract reciprocal
altruism and its formulation also has a
center what that should mean if you did
the same mapping for for cultures is
that you should be able to place
cultures on a Continuum from kin based
orientation to this more abstract
formulation that freeze up economic
resources right and then the hypothesis
you would derive from that is that the
most difficult problems of integration
would
arise as a consequence of trying to
integrate the most kin-based
systems and you could further
hypothesize that it might even be worse
than that it might be that the most
difficult people to integrate would be
the psychopath who take advantage for
themselves of the ethos of the kin-based
system right because we always have the
psychopath problem right and and people
don't like that problem but like it's a
world destroying problem so okay so what
do you think of that idea generally
speaking let's put the psychopath part
of it aside for the moment in the in the
end decisive but let's just take your
basic premise I fully agree with this
and I think we also see it um as a
progression
in uh you know these Divine texts right
we can read very clearly that the story
of the Good
Samaritan is a story about increasing
the size of the circle of
collaboration and I would argue that
there's an
overarching
trajectory that as Society become larger
that the mythology that fuels them
encompasses this idea and so you keep
getting what it's probably yeah go ahead
well you know Sam Harris with whom I
know you've had your differences one of
Sam's
motivations was to ground an ethos in
the
objective that could serve as a
irrefutable counterposition to the
problem of evil
and he thought that could only be done
empirically right and that's partly why
he is loath to consider any such
superstitious representation as might be
encoded in religion but I've been
thinking along lines parallel to you and
it seems to me that he's looking in the
wrong objective
space so because the hypothesis that
you're putting forward you correct me if
I've got this wrong is that there's a
pattern might even be partially mapped
already by tit fortat competitions but
there's a pattern
of complex social interaction that
iterates best across time in an uphill
direction that
viewed over a sufficiently long period
of time can be seen to have a stable and
emergent structure that would be its
intrinsic ethos and that's the intrinsic
ethos that's captured let's say most
effectively in relationship to political
and economic organization by the
founding documents of the US but it's
real it's real it's real like
your relationship with me and my
relationship with you is dependent on
our willingness to tell each other the
truth to aim at a mutually desirable
goal and to continue doing that doing
that across time that's a pattern it's
real it's objectively real now I'm
finishing up a book at the moment called
we who wrestle with God and it's an
elaborated analysis of the proclivity of
foundational narratives to encode that
pattern of radical reciprocity and to
expand its purview and its depth of
representation across
time and that looks to me like a place
where the findings of evolutionary
psychology and biology can be seen to
Dove t with the claims of the
metaphysical stories upon which our
culture is based now well I'll let let
you comment on that because I'm
obviously you can see the parallel
between the way that we're approaching
this problem so I haven't concentrated
as much in my thinking on the difference
between the kin based Allegiance systems
and the more abstract systems although I
can see
that that seems like a CL that seems
like a clear part of the story right of
the of the story of the progression
towards a more productive
universalism so how is this okay so so
first of all why do you comment on that
and then I want to know what these
realizations have done to the way that
you've been thinking and then maybe
we'll return to the immigration issue
sure well the first thing to say is you
know I come from a a weird discipline
and I've
departed from its mainstream in order to
be able to be productive in thinking
about humans because although humans are
an evolved creature like every other
they're a very special creature in the
way they actually
function but I could tell the story that
you just told in what I believe
are uh rigorous evolutionary
terms and it it would have certain
advantages to be able to see certain
subtleties but it would be pretty close
to useless from the point of view of
operationalizing it as the basis of a
society far better if you are going to
operationalize something for society to
encode it in a narrative that is
memorable and transmissible and
resistant to being to being
corrupted motivating motivating and
stabilizing um comprehensible by
everyone regardless of level of abstract
intellectual PR
100% so you know there's a moment uh
during the debate you had with Sam the
two night debate you had with Sam in
Vancouver which I had the the privilege
and honor of moderating um where Sam
confronted you and asked if you really
believed that uh Jesus had been
resurrected yeah and I remember this
moment like it was yesterday you thought
uh you must have thought for a few
seconds and you said I behave as if I
do and I heard that and I thought that
is the slam dunk answer to this
question Sam didn't get it right in fact
he doesn't get it to this day but what
you said is the way an evolutionist
would think about this because
culture is a means to an end what is
that end it is to get your genes
unfortunately lodged as far into the
future as you can possibly arrange from
your current position and to keep them
there to you want to hand the ball off
as far into the future as you can and
you want to hand off the motivation for
those who receive that ball in the
future to do it again right and
eventually that will fail quick
intervention there because we should
turn to this because it's equally
Salient it's a point equally Salient to
the one that you just described in my
discussion with Sam that's what the
story of Abraham represents because what
God promises
Abraham is that if he maintains a
certain pattern of orientation and
conduct that not only will he have a son
which was an impossibility for him and
his wife but that he will literally be
the father of Nations and so what that
story is
encoding is a pattern of sacrificial
attitude that most optimally ensures the
preservation of genetic material across
the broadest range of possible
situations as indefinitely into the
future as Can Be Imagined and that's
what it means mythologically to act in
the light of Eternity right it's that
you're not and and this is also I think
where where people like Dawkins go
seriously wrong and The evolutionary
biologists in general people like Sigman
Freud even is that reproduction is not
sex sex is a fragment of reproduction
like SE reproduction is is sex for
mosquitoes reproduction is sex sex for
psychopaths but it's not reproduction
sex is not reproduction for people who
are engaged in this higher order process
of maximally inclusive reciprocal
altruism okay so so anyway it took me a
long time to understand this about the
story of Abraham in particular right is
that now I got to I got to add one more
thing to that because I think this is
equally revolutionary so Abraham's
behavior is characterized by a
particular sacrificial attitude and
that's famously obviously and that
that's a form of work sacrifice is a
form of work you're sacrificing the the
hedonic Delights of the present and
perhaps even your orientation towards
immediate power for something
approximating a long-term gain and maybe
a joint psychological and communal
long-term gain that's sacrifice now
Human Sacrifice we work and once we know
that and that's established in the story
of Cain and Abel by the way it's like it
starts with Adam and Eve because they're
they're doomed to work after the fall
Cain and abble establish two patterns of
sacrificial Behavior Abraham is a
manifestation of one of those patterns
of sacrifice the idea of the sacrifice
of that which you love best to
facilitate further adaptation is
developed extensively in the story of
Abraham with this story of the potential
necessity of the sacrifice of Isaiah and
that's played out in its full
manifestation in the gospel stories and
the the the culmination of this and I
can't see how it can be any other way
frankly is that the most appropriate
form of sacrifice that guarantees the
best possible outcome All Things
Considered is the full and radical
voluntary sacrifice of the self in
relationship to the highest possible
good and I think that's what's encoded
in the Christian narrative that's what
it looks like to me it's a limit story
right of of sorts because it it
investigates the nooks and cranny
of all the dimensions of potential
self-sacrifice in in service of the
highest and integrates them and so
anyways that's partly what this new book
is about but that's where my thought has
gone
further with regard to the point that
you
made about what happened in Vancouver I
knew then what you just said which was
that I answered that because I knew that
that was the biologically appropriate
answer right that's where the rubber
hits the road
man that's yeah that's what that's what
this whole experiment is and all of the
architecture all of the language we have
and the structures the belief structures
that we carry and the stories that we
transmit them with that architecture is
about something that we can't see and
didn't even have a hint existed until a
couple hundred years ago so um that's a
that's a tough pill to swallow and as
you point out most people don't have the
background to see yeah but um I would
also point out though that if you
compare the difference between what you
said I behave as if I do it wouldn't
matter if you spoke as if you did as
long as you behaved as if you did and it
wouldn't matter somebody who speaks as
if they believe it but doesn't behave
that way is the inverse the point is
this is all about modifying Behavior
which
brings I would say too to Brett also
attention you know it's become
increasingly clear in the last decade
that the notion of perception
independent of action is is a falsehood
right because your eyes are moving in
accordance with what you value so that
you can pick up the relevant sense data
all the time and so the your the
orientation of ethos in action extends
to perception itself to the to the way
the world makes itself manifest to you
as a consequence of the choice that you
make with every glance about how you're
going to interact with it that also
demolishes it demolishes the
empirical the enlightenment empirical
story it's done because the empirical
story was predicated on the assumption
that there was a value-free perception
and the postmodernists critique that and
they were they were they were right now
I would actually Chen you on this
because although at one level um you're
correct there's no way to free yourself
from perceptual bias entirely I would
argue that science properly practiced
that is to say practiced carefully
according to the underlying philosophy
not just the Motions but the actual
philosophy of science that makes it work
is at the end of the day it is a uh slow
tool that has one major advantage which
is that it is capable of telling you
that which you don't expect and don't
want to hear right it tells you things
that are you are not predisposed to see
but it has to be wielded uh in the
proper manner the fact that it takes
place in a laboratory isn't good enough
um the fact that it's reported in a
scientific paper doesn't do it you have
to do the method correctly and then it
can tell you what what you wouldn't have
happened on through the process you're
describing yes I but I would say yes but
and I think it's yes but for the reason
you already outlined at least in part in
your discussion of the relationship
between kin orientation and this more
abstract orientation so I would say that
what science allows you to do is to
circumvent transcend your own your own
particularized
biases but it can't happen at all in the
absence of an orientation that's
encapsulated within this reciprocally
altruistic broader abstract ethos so
because for example imagine you're a
cancer
researcher so you're accepting an ethos
axiomatically before you analyze the
data and the ethos is something like it
would be better if there was less
suffering it would be better if there
were fewer cancer victims it would be
better if we knew more about disease in
general and the results of my truthful
investig a will be of benefit to people
regardless of their relatedness to
me and all of those are intellectual
pre-commitments that have to occur
before you can even face the data in
your spreadsheets properly if you're
ethos is I'm going to extract from this
spreadsheet the patterns in this
spreadsheet the story that will
maximally benefit me and my family
economically in the short term then you
instantly become a careerist scientist
and you pollute the entire Enterprise
and so I would say that that science
only works if it's embedded in the ethos
towards which we're developing I think I
mean i' I've tried to break that
argument into bits and and but I can't I
I I can't move that argument no you're
you're entirely right and as much as my
argument earlier about the value of
opportunity being as broadly distributed
as possible runs counter to this
one advantage of the glory period of
science where it was done by gentlemen
scientists was that they did not have
the perverse careerist incentives they
served their interest by being right in
the long run that's how they became
Immortal and that is a good a good
motivator and what we have now has taken
something that looks exactly like
science and turned it on its head it's
just it's obscene and you know I think
Co taught us this lesson in in Spades we
saw for the first time the um the level
at which this is just uh it is a
distilled form of corruption that is so
pernicious that it can you know it can
actually take a poison and label it as a
cure and it can take the Cure and label
it as a poison and it doesn't even blink
so that's what happens if the other
incentives are allowed to pervade the
system
and we have to rescue ourselves from it
because that's that's where we are
across the bo as far as we should well
we should note too historically speaking
that the scientists of the type that you
described so the genuine scientists were
very much akin to monks in a monastery
and I mean their universities were
monasteries to begin with and they were
saturated whether they knew that or not
by that ethos now they had a hard time
distinguishing between the descriptions
they generated as a consequence of their
objectifying process and the narratives
that structured the ethos within which
they operated right they they they
confused the motivating dream with the
material objective facts and this is
still what people like Dawkins and
Harris are doing they don't understand
that there's a difference between the
structure of the maps of meaning that
organize our
perceptions structure our attention and
our actions and the facts that present
us themselves to us as a consequences of
this process of objective comparison
that emerges as a consequence of the
scientific
process well you know in both of their
cases and I don't mean to take them to
tasks specifically but they've they've
sort of volunteered for that job
um the most glaring example of the
blindness that this creates is their
failure to
recognize that religious belief is every
bit as deserving of an EV evolutionary
explanation as a wing or an eye or a
pigment any of these structures and so
to dismiss religious belief as a
pathology is so um it is shering the
most fundamental responsibility that a
scientifically minded person has to look
at a pattern and say I can tell that
that means something but I don't yet
know what it is right I'm not going to
dismiss it just because I don't get it
yet right absolute Absol that's exactly
right is that they're not I agree with
you completely is that they're not I
looked at the religious landscape like a
biologist it's like what the hell is
going on here right what is happening
here it it it's it's no more rational
than what would you say the morphology
of a
platypus right it's it's strange and
paradoxical and dreamlike and peculiar
like most manifestations of nature okay
here I've got another proposition for
you tell me what you think about this
because I've been trying to define the
religious okay so imagine this that we
let's take a let's think about that
semantic network of meaning again now
that some of the concepts that you have
are more dependent on some Concepts than
on other
Concepts so now imagine your conceptions
aren't just a they're not just an
aggregation of words and they're not
just a network of words they're a
hierarchy of Concepts and here's how you
define a
hierarchy some things that you believe
are more dependent on other things than
on a set of different things so here
here's an example one of the fundamental
predicates of a marriage is
Fidelity and so what that means is that
when the presumption of f Fidelity is
violated the marriage shakes and
trembles it isn't generally the case
that whether or not your wife washes the
dishes as quickly as you might like is a
fundamental predicate of your marriage
because not very much depends on that so
there's a network of dependen
and I think we track that emotionally by
the way Brett I think we track that
emotionally such that our emotions know
where in the hierarchy of dependency a
given concept sits and if that's
threatened it produces both more
excitement in the exploratory sense and
more apprehension because entropy is
released and the best models of anxiety
now are entropy release models by the
way so there's a hierarchy of dependency
okay that's the depths when we say that
an idea is deep what we mean is that a
very large number of other propositions
depend for their validity on the
validity of that idea now there's a
hierarchy and there's something at the
bottom or at the Apex you can use either
metaphorical structure and we've been
inferring for centuries what that core
Foundation or Apex piece might be right
and so
what is religious is what is most deep
that's a definition it's a definition
and what is deep is that
which what much upon which much
relies right and so the so the first
thing I'd like and you know you can see
the same thing in science we know that
there are fundamental theorems in
science upon which whole disciplines
rest there's no difference we know that
there are contributors to the scientific
Enterprise who are very vastly cited and
we presume that their ideas are deep not
least because the consequence of that
mass citation is the embeddedness of
those ideas in almost every other idea
of the
discipline so okay so the first question
would be what do you think of that idea
of depth like technically speaking and
then imagine that the emotions that are
elicited when things move in the depths
are the array of emotions that have been
exper associated with religious
phenomenology since time
immemorial well uh that's quite
interesting I'm
recognizing uh you know I'm I'm sort of
the odd man out in a lot of the circles
that I travel in these days I'm
shock but I uh you know I spend a lot of
time with conservatives uh there are a
lot more uh religious people in my life
than I would have expected maybe they
outnumber the secularists considerably
at this point but I've been thinking
about why that might be and what I'm
realizing is
that there
is let's say among the covid dissidents
there are quite a number of religious
people who stood up at Great personal
cost and said what needed to be said in
order to uh to to break the
spell and I think the reason for that is
because if you have a religious
structuring to what you're I've
forgotten what term you use but I would
say that we have this hierarchy you call
it a hierarchy I would say it's a it's a
model which we take in we build it based
on what works what doesn't work we build
up a model over a lifetime and we're
very reluctant to pull a piece out on
which much depends because then suddenly
our model doesn't work right so people
who have a religious model of the
universe where they actually believe
they're not just going through the
motions um have a motivational structure
that upends the game theory that causes
so many people to falter right if you
believe that you are um being watched
and perhaps Guided by an
intelligence that um if you do the right
thing then whatever pain your enemies
May inflict upon you will be dwarfed by
uh the reward that you will get Eternal
reward mhm the Eternal reward exactly
then the point is you're in a lot better
position to stare down tyrants and
Bullies than somebody who is trapped in
their somatic experience of the moment
AB absolutely or their desire for power
for that matter right so there are lots
of traps that people who have a deep
relationship with this sort of thinking
can avoid but the number of let's put it
this way every religious scientist has
an utterly idiosyncratic way of holding
those beliefs in the mind so that they
don't trip over the parts that conflict
with what they know from the
laboratory right so it's a very odd
landscape and um mostly you know there's
something about it that actually reminds
me of the way Jews often hold religious
belief which is its purpose isn't really
to be pushed on all that much that
nobody the you know a congregation holds
their belief structure at a great range
of distances from themselves some people
absolutely believe this is the you know
the literal word of God and other people
have a very remote relationship with it
but it's not a zero relationship it's
just one in which it doesn't impinge
directly on uh you know their analytical
thinking so that freedom to hold that
relationship in a uniquely generated
fashion that doesn't conflict with the
rest of the model one uses to to deal
with the universe is I think necessary
and it again speaks to a strength of the
West right that we are not about
separation of church and state allows
that to some degree right because what
you're what you're pointing to to some
degree is the
optimization of stability and play right
and some people are going to VI for more
stability and less play probably in a
ordance with their temperament and
perhaps their intellectual capabilities
and others are going to as a consequence
of that distancing let's say allow for a
wider range of
experimentation within what is still a a
walled enclosure right at some at some
distance the territory that they're
allowed to range through is is is
broader now the price they might pay for
that is a little more entropy in the
system right a little more existential
anxiety but the advantage would be that
they can experiment I got something cool
to tell you biologically you tell me
what you think about
this this was only discovered in
November of
2022 so you know
that for all intents and purposes that
this the molecular alterations that
facilitate mutation are random and
there's real good reasons for that
Randomness partly because to the degree
that mutations are caused by radiation
the Striking point of the radiation
is random however there is a hierarchy
of
repairability so the more yes there is
yes exact this is a deadly finding so
what that means is and and I I haven't
been able to reconcile this entirely
with my understanding of evolutionary
biology but that means there's a core
set of principles by which the system
operates and then Out On The Fringe
there's allowable room for variation and
experimentation right and I think that
that's the pattern of all conceptual
structures there's a core set of
foundational principles and those are
religious principles and I don't care if
you're religious or not is that they
serve the function of the deepest
mechanisms of orientation so I don't
care what you call that doesn't matter
because they're there and then
experimentation can take place on The
Fringe now temperamentally some people
would be inclined to experiment at
deeper levels right and that would be
the difference between someone who's
less or more fundamentalist in their
orientation so and so what do you what
do you think of that as an analogy on
the biological side well I've been
playing with that analogy from the
biological side and I have uh a
framework built up so I I refer to these
two polls as the sacred and the
shamanistic and the idea is that even
within a religious tradition right there
is the sacred which are the things that
one is most most loathe to upend because
they are most fundamental and then
there's the shamanistic where you know
depending on the tradition the monks may
be experimenting with uh I don't know
genic substances right and the point is
we don't we don't ask them too much what
they're doing and if they find something
important they report it out in a way
that we can disavow it if need be the
point is both of these processes are
there for a reason and the fact is yeah
we see exactly this in the genome and it
even extends beyond what you've
suggested it's not just repairability
issue okay so we have um the ability uh
for example let's take
immunity the way immunity develops when
you encounter a disease is something
called clonal selection in which a
subset of your cells
literally evolves on the scale of hours
to days in order to defeat that pathogen
right so this is a a a part of the um of
the body that has become genetically
experimental because it is necessary to
do so in order to fight an enemy that
your body has never seen so anyway yes
sacred to the shamanistic that exists in
the genome it exists in religious
traditions and we are messing this up we
are not realizing that much of that
basically culture is a means to an end
that genes have produced a mind that is
fundamentally cultural because it can
evolve more rapidly genetically right
but the problem with that is that much
of the stuff that is generated in the
moment is noise
right you can look at long-standing
genes and say I know they must have
served the interests of the lineage that
that carried them because they stood the
test of time right they have a cost and
yet they stood the test of time but
culture you don't know that something is
useful until it's lasted for at least
hundreds of years which means that most
of the new stuff that we see is probably
bad for us and we don't have enough
skepticism of it yeah well that's
actually why I think there's variability
and trait
openness it's like some of the new stuff
is absolutely
vital more of it is deadly and most of
it is noise now if you're high in
openness it's a highrisk high return
strategy you're very very likely to fail
which is generally the fate of most
wouldbe entrepreneurs unless they repeat
the experiment multiple times if you do
succeed you can succeed unbelievably
radically right and then you might say
well to hell with openness so that would
be no shamanic tradition let's say but
the problem with that is then there's no
variability or experimentation and that
doesn't work either because the future
is actually different from the past
right so there has to be experimentation
because otherwise you can't keep up so
this is also so this as far as I can
tell Brett this seems to be a place
where the evolutionary biology and these
new models of theological thinking can
dovetail perfectly we can say something
like well the relationship between ideas
is akin to the relationship
between the relationship that obtains
that governs mutation it's the same
thing it's logically enough because idea
proliferation is the analog to mutation
so why wouldn't it be the same thing and
it implies that on both those levels
there's a core set of
axiomatic principles that you violate
very rarely and at your extreme danger
this is by the way that this is the
reason that Aza dies when he touches the
Ark of the
Covenant right so the Israelites are
pack in the Ark of the Covenant across
the desert and they trip a little bit
and this Soldier reaches out to steady
the ark and God strikes him dead and
David is unhappy about that believing it
to be unjust but the moral of the story
is there are certain things that you
touch at your peril regardless of the
potential benevolence of your
motivations
that's fascinating so I have one thing
uh this is probably not going to make a
tremendous amount of sense yet we'll
have to unpack it another time because
it's a a deep discussion but um it's not
really that the that culture is like the
genome it does have a superficial
resemblance in the way it evolves but
the way to see it most clearly is that
culture is one of several epigenetic
mechanism M and as much as it is strange
to think of it this way all the
epigenetic
mechanisms seem to abide by the same set
of rules and the rule I'll just distill
it for you we call it the Omega Heather
and I call it the Omega
principle the idea is that epigenetic
phenomena are more powerful than genes
because they are more rapidly adapting
but they are subservient to the genes
uh motivation in other words they have
to serve genetic ends at least
historically now I do wonder and one of
the things I worry about in the Revival
of um religious belief that we are
watching the thing I'm concerned about
is that actually we are at a unique
moment in history where we have to turn
the tables on the genes the genes are
utterly immoral
they've produced a mental structure
which is capable of morality but they've
done that as a means to an end and my
feeling is that what is best about
humans what distinguishes us from all of
the other
creatures is not our morphology it's
what we are cognitively capable of it's
the goodness it's the Insight The
Compassion those are the things which
should be in the driver's seat but
they're not and you and I have talked
before about the danger of tragedies of
History reoccurring that these are
spasms that tap into uh predispositions
inside the human character that people
don't expect because they grow up during
times when they're not visible and then
suddenly um they they emerge and I'm not
there's no way that it can be safe to
experiment with such a fundamental
change but I'm concerned that if we
don't f figure out how to put our better
angels in
charge that we are going to be condemned
to that same pattern reoccurring with
ever more ferocious Weaponry yeah yeah
that's yeah yep yep yep well that's that
is the that is the issue of the moment
not not only
Weaponry not only me that ter I mean
that term generally technology exact
exactly well this is see one of the
things that really maybe we can close
with this because we're at the right
time to do that um one of the things
that Carl Yung pointed out at the end of
the second World War I think actually it
was when the hydrogen bomb was developed
to tell you the
truth and this is what he was pointing
to in his work on Alchemy by the way
which is why he delved into Alchemy he
was trying to understand the substrate
of intrinsic value that even guides the
scientific Endeavor so that's what he
was up to now the reason he was doing
that was because believed that we had
rapidly expanded our technological
capacity since the dawn of the
Scientific Revolution but had failed to
do the same with our understanding of
our underlying ethos and so now we were
as primitive ethically as we were in
1450 with the tools of the 21st century
and that there is no if you're going to
have big toys you better be a wise
player and we're at that moment and my
sense is that and I I would say the
positive consequence of this
hypothetical Revival that you're
describing would be that I think we can
actually become conscious of these
things explicitly in a way that wasn't
possible before I think that's right at
hand before us I think that that's
what's making itself manifest to people
like Ian hery Ali and like Neil Ferguson
and like Douglas Murray and like you and
we can see and and Jonathan Paso we can
see a shift a tectonic shift at the
level of
conceptualization it might even be that
the entire culture war is a
manifestation of that emerging shift
right because we're at War to some
degree with the idea that there isn't
anything other than Hedonism and
power right and
that's that's the radical proposition
the certainly the postmodernist
proposition was that especially
emanating from people like Fuko and Dara
was that there was especially Fuko there
wasn't anything other than power and
power is always utilized in the service
of a short-term Hedonism because why the
hell else would you bother with the
power so so let if maybe let me uh try
to summarize those things because I I
think we've arrived somewhere very we
start even with the Daran
Gap oh that's going to be an interesting
trick let's see if I can I can find a
way y um but what you're pointing to
um we are somewhere new in history
because of the power of our technology
which takes off the table the
traditional way that terrible problems
like this have been solved by Evolution
Evolution was a process in which people
whose belief structures or orientation
or models were dangerously off could go
extinct leaving behind those whose
models weren't so broken we can't do
that now that tool as terrible as it was
at least worked what we have now is a
system where we are all tied together
such that
um the bad folks may get what they
deserve but we're also going to get what
they deserve and the tool for thinking
your way out of such a puzzle without
actually having to go through
extinctions of various populations is
consciousness Consciousness evolved I
would argue for this exact purpose for
addressing novelty and being able to see
to follow through what will happen if I
behave in a certain way so that you
don't have to suffer that
consequence sacrifice your
stupidity right and I guess this does
bring us back to the question of the
Darian Gap because what we see going on
in
Panama really looks like um an an old
model that is now taking on tremendous
new new power and putting us in global
Jeopardy by deciding to move people and
resources to dispense with the consent
of the governed and that is going to end
very badly so the message to us is that
the Peril we detect in places like
Darion it's telling us something which
is that we need to to rise to a kind of
collective Consciousness we need to
realize ize that what is binding us
together is not genetic relatedness it
is common purpose that we all if we
think clearly should want to bequeath to
our descendants a a Marvelous World and
instead we are going to give them a
world that is greatly diminished even to
the one that we were given so I think it
is that moment and I think so too we
better get God help us
absolutely all right right sir well
everybody for everybody watching and
listening I'm going to delve further
into these ideas with Brett in the half
an hour that we'll spend together on the
dailywire plus side of the platform so
if you're inclined to join us there then
please feel more than welcome to do so
um Can can I add something for those who
are interested in a deeper look into the
questions raised by what's going on in
Panama um if they go to the Darkhorse
Darkhorse is one word the Darkhorse
locals Community um there's a discussion
between myself and Chris Martinson there
in which we explore the stuff in great
depth all right excellent so everybody's
uh enjoined to go do precisely that
right yes and to also take up Brett's
challenge to view these political events
and economic events these practical On
The Ground events in light of the
broader reality of the culture war that
is tearing us to Pieces so all right so
well thank you very much Brett um and to
everybody watching and listening thank
you very much for your time and
attention and uh on to the next
challenge thanks Jordan love you
[Music]
brother